(plane engines roaring)
(slow music)
- [Reporter] It's just after lunch onboard
Qantas Flight 72 from Singapore to Perth.
- Sir, would you like a drink?
- [Reporter] Qantas flight
attendant Fuzzy Maiava
is busy attending to
passengers in the cabin.
- [Fuzzy] Orange juice for you, madam.
- If I can make your flight
a lot easier, I'm your man.
And I thought it was going to
be another great day, yeah.
- [Reporter] Up in the cockpit.
- How's everything going?
- [Pilot] Very good.
- [Reporter] Captain Kevin
Sullivan has just climbed
back into his seat after a
rest break, when suddenly.
(instruments beeping)
The plane's autopilot disconnects.
- Autopilot one appears
to have disconnected.
- And then we started
getting stall warnings.
(alarm ringing)
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- And then we started
getting overspeed warnings.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] And then it happens.
(dramatic music)
- [Man] Stall, stall.
(alarm ringing)
Stall, stall.
- The plane, it started going down,
pitching down violently down.
- [Reporter] Tonight for the first time
the previously untold story of
Qantas' worst ever accident.
- Bang, my head went
through the cabin ceiling.
- [Reporter] How a plane went psycho,
injuring 100 passengers and crew.
- You died six or seven
times on the operating table.
- I am lucky to be here alive.
- [Reporter] And destroying
once happy lives.
- It got to the point where
I tried to take my own life.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] The hero pilot who
fought against his own plane
to save his passengers and crew.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- The automation is
there to keep you safe,
and was actually trying to kill us.
- [Reporter] And how the
lessons of Qantas Flight 72
have gone unheeded.
- All of us are deeply
sorry for the loss of life.
- [Reporter] With two planes
crashing within six months
of each other, killing
all 346 people on board.
- When you see what's happening
with the 737 MAX accidents,
they're the same.
They were in no man's land.
They didn't know what was happening.
And their instinctive
reaction to pull back
and stop the ground from hitting them
was not enough to save the day.
(slow music)
- [Reporter] Kevin Sullivan
doesn't fly anymore.
What happened that day in the skies
over the Indian Ocean has
affected him profoundly.
- I could have hidden it, but
I think it's more courageous
to be honest with yourself
and honest to say yeah, it's affected me.
I don't shirk my responsibility
as a commercial pilot and the captain.
I reached the point where
it was best that I stop.
- [Reporter] Growing up in California,
Kevin always dreamed of being a pilot.
And by his early 20s he was a Top Gun
fighter pilot in the US Navy.
- As a F-14 pilot in the Cold War
I flew off aircraft carriers,
the landing area moves.
At night you can't see the landing area
until you're actually on it.
We were essentially at war.
We trained and flew to that
level of extreme readiness.
- [Reporter] Then came an
opportunity to flyMirage jets
as part of an exchange programme
with the Royal Australian Air Force.
- It's a speed machine.
At low level I've been very fast,
over 600 knots, 1,200 kilometres an hour.
(rock music)
- [Reporter] The young
American loved Australia
and those jets so much he
ended up settling here.
After you, Kevin.
- Thank you.
How did you organise this?
- [Reporter] What do you think?
- [Kevin] Yeah, it's pretty special.
- [Reporter] The Mirage III, there she is.
- We called it the French lady,
or the Aussies did, and I do too.
No, you can't stand on the seat.
- You need a degree just to get in.
35 years along life's runway
and Kevin Sullivan's love
for his French lady hasn't dimmed.
- It's just like getting
into a Formula 1 car.
You don't have much room.
It becomes part of you.
- Not a bad place to hone your skills.
- There's no automation on this thing.
- (laughs) You need to know how to fly
this one by hand, I tell ya.
Kevin eventually moved
onto a job with Qantas
flying its biggest passenger jets.
(plane engines roaring)
- How's everything going?
- Smooth sailing.
- [Reporter] By October
2008, he's had decades
of experience as a commercial pilot.
But it's his time as a Top
Gun that will prove crucial.
- We were coming up to the
northwest coast of Australia.
We could see it out the windscreen.
And the Indian Ocean was calm and blue.
- [Reporter] On this clear,
blue day at the controls
of a Qantas Airbus, Captain Kevin Sullivan
is about to be tested in the
most dramatic way possible.
(instruments beeping)
- Autopilot one appears
to have disconnected.
- When was the first
indication of trouble?
- The autopilot disconnected.
And then we started
getting stall warnings.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
(alarm ringing)
Stall, stall.
- It sounds like, "Stall, stall."
It means the plane will stop flying,
it will start to go down.
And then we started
getting overspeed warnings.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- Stall warning and
overspeed at the same time.
- It's impossible.
- It doesn't make sense
to me because overspeed
is you're at your maximum limit
and stall it means you're
at your minimum speed limit.
- What the hell?
Get Pete back in here.
- First officer to the
flight deck, please.
- And then the plane started moving.
And initially it was a dip.
(dramatic music)
- [Man] Stall, stall.
(alarm ringing)
- And then it started going down,
pitching down aggressively
and violently down.
(alarm ringing)
It generated a force that
we had to brace ourselves
against the instrument glare shield
to stop from basically
hitting the ceiling,
even with our seat belts secured.
I was accelerating down
towards the Indian Ocean
and certainly my windscreens
were filled with the Indian Ocean.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
(alarm ringing)
- QF72 is in a death dive
and refusing to let Kevin take control.
This is my broader understanding.
So the plane's flying along.
The sensors are giving
some sort of information
at the computer system that
the plane is pointed upwards
so it tries to overcorrect.
And then obviously points you back down.
Is that a fair summary?
- Yes, in a way.
It's saying, "Sorry,
Kev, I'm protecting you.
"So I'm not going to let you stop me."
Like the HAL 9000 in
"2001: A Space Odyssey"
where Dave asks him to
open the pod bay doors
and HAL says, "I'm sorry, Dave.
"I can't let you do that."
I'm pulling back on the
stick and I'm saying,
"Hey, HAL, stop moving the nose."
And it's like, "I'm sorry,
Kev, I can't let you do that."
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] But no way is
this proud ex-fighter pilot
going to let a rogue computer beat him.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- I was in a near death position
and I was going to fight to the death
to make sure that didn't happen.
(mid-tempo music)
- [Reporter] Qantas
Flight 72 from Singapore
is cruising comfortably at 37,000 feet.
- [Woman] I'll have a glass
of white wine, please.
- Glass of white wine.
- [Reporter] In just over two hours,
the Airbus A330 will land in Perth.
It's been a routine flight.
Some of the passengers onboard
are off duty Qantas staff
returning from holidays.
Among them, Bruce Southcott,
a flight services manager
travelling with his wife, Caroline.
- Aircraft was flying flat and still.
And I watched the glass of wine
sit there without a ripple.
(alarm ringing)
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] But up in the cockpit
the plane's flight control
system is going haywire.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] The aircraft's computers
are telling Captain Kevin Sullivan
his plane is about to stall.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] And then suddenly
the plane is hurtling down
towards the Indian Ocean.
- There wasn't really any first sign.
It just happened.
Like the hand of God had just
pushed the aircraft down.
There was no woo, let's
go, as a rollercoaster.
It was just like, slam.
- [Reporter] Bruce is
wearing his seat belt.
(dramatic music)
But Caroline is just coming
back from the toilet.
- I remember getting hit
on the head with the plane.
And I just went bang.
And before I could think, bang again.
And then the third bang,
my head went through the cabin ceiling.
After the third time it hit me on the head
I pretty much was knocked out.
- [Reporter] An off duty
Qantas pilot, Peter Casey
and his wife, Diana, a Qantas
customer service manager,
have left their seats to say hello
to flight attendant Fuzzy Maiava.
- Fuzzy, God love him, was down there
checking out the catering, as he does.
The three of us chatting away.
- I placed my meal in the oven.
I was focused on the timer,
you see, 'cause I was hungry.
And then when I saw the exact
time on it, it was 13 seconds.
And that's when I saw the corner of my eye
someone had just shot up.
And I just sort of looked down
and the plane was
disappearing from my feet.
(body thudding)
- I heard a slight change in
the airflow of the aeroplane,
and I thought, oh, this is interesting.
And the next thing you know,
whomp, up we went.
- I must have hit something,
must have hit the ceiling
'cause I just, I was knocked out.
- The three of us up in the ceiling
probably only for seconds
but it seemed like an eternity.
- [Reporter] The Casey's daughters,
17-year-old Becky and 18-year-old Elise,
are at the front of the cabin.
- The first nosedive, my sister,
she grabbed onto the bottom of her chair,
and she looked up at me as I
was on the top of the aeroplane.
- [Reporter] You were actually
pinned to the ceiling?
- Yeah.
- [Reporter] Feel like forever?
- It did.
It felt like a few minutes.
(alarm ringing)
- [Reporter] Back in the
cockpit, Kevin Sullivan
is desperately trying to take
back control of his plane.
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- We're basically fighting
for our lives at this stage.
- They had to very quickly discover
what part of the aeroplane
was trying to kill them
and how to stop it from doing so.
- [Reporter] If there's any other pilot
who understands exactly
what Captain Sullivan
is facing, it's the other Sully.
Captain Chesley Sullenberger
lost both his engines
in a bird strike and had to land his plane
in New York's Hudson River.
- Captain, I'd like
your insight if I could.
I'm trying to tap into I guess
the anguish of that moment,
what it must have been like for the pilot.
- Well at first it would
have been confusing,
surprising, a huge startle factor.
And then one would
immediately begin to act
to regain control of the aeroplane.
- [Reporter] Kevin Sullivan's next move
is completely counter-intuitive.
Instead of pulling back on the
control stick, he lets it go.
- I have a choice to make,
do I hold onto it, or do I release it?
My military training for out of control
is to release, neutralise controls.
- [Reporter] It works.
The plane is no longer
falling from the sky.
But now passengers are being
smashed back down to the floor.
(dramatic music)
(metal clanging)
- We heard an almighty
crash coming from the cabin.
And that was the people's bodies.
That was the galleys coming apart.
And it sounds like a 40
foot shipping container
full of cutlery and glass
that is sent down a
ramp into a brick wall.
- I just came crashing down.
My sister, she was eating,
and her fork went in my arm. (laughs)
Got a bit stuck when I came down.
It's the little things that you remember.
- When I came back down I hit the armrest.
- Armrest, yeah.
- And then I realised that all my bones
were clicking in my back, and I realised
that there was something
terribly wrong, very wrong.
I couldn't move off the floor.
The staff were asking me
to go back to my chair.
And I couldn't get up at all,
I couldn't move my legs at all.
- [Reporter] Your legs weren't working?
- Nope.
My ankle was broken.
So my ankle was just sort of hanging.
Eventually another passenger
came and picked me up
and put me in my chair.
- Hit the galley bench.
That's what woke me up.
All I could hear was the
crushing sounds my knee is going.
I don't know what the heck is going on.
All I see is blood rushing
out of Peter's head.
And Diana, she's unconscious.
And then I see the two
girls I was looking after.
Oh man, one of them who
was sat on the aisle seat,
she stuck her hand out to me
and she was just crying.
And to me, that's like my own daughter.
I mean, I just couldn't do anything.
And I just felt so helpless
because I couldn't move.
(dramatic music)
- [Reporter] Back in the
cockpit, Kevin Sullivan
has pulled the plane
out of its death dive.
- What the hell was that?
- [Reporter] But he's
still fighting for control.
- It's the primary flight computer.
- Now we're in this revolver
of faulting systems.
- In effect, this is a
total system collapse.
- The plane is starting to melt down.
- Automatic brake's not working.
Four is not working.
- Let's get us back up to 37,000 feet.
- I'm still pretty coherent.
Yes, my cages are a little bit rattled
because we don't know what's happening.
- [Reporter] And just two minutes later--
- Don't you do it.
- [Reporter] It happens again.
(dramatic music)
- I'm basically a passenger,
I'm an observer now.
The automation that's there
is supposed to be keeping me safe,
not putting me into harm's way.
And I got very angry.
- I thought it was the end.
- Really?
It was so violent you thought
you were going to die?
- Yeah.
I think being so young as well
and not having experienced life
outside of high school yet,
you don't really know what
to expect in the big world.
And honestly, I just thought that was it.
- All I could hear was the
sounds that we were going to die.
But you just hope to God
that it happens quick.
- Death?
- Yes, and I don't want to feel any pain.
I was frozen like a block of ice
just waiting for it to happen.
(slow dramatic music)
- [Reporter] Once again, Kevin Sullivan's
military training saves his plane.
- We have lost auto pitch trim.
- [Reporter] But he has no idea if,
or when, it will happen again.
- Another failure in trim three.
Reset?
- No, no.
- [Reporter] Everyone responds
to trauma differently.
Kevin Sullivan cracks a joke.
He picks a line from another
of his favourite movies, "Flying High".
- Looks like I picked a bad
day to quit sniffing glue.
- [Reporter] First Officer Peter
Lipsett had been on a break
when the plane went into its dive.
He's injured, but he makes
it back to the cockpit.
- That's a shit fight out there.
I think I've just broken my nose.
- Congratulations.
Strap in, we're in trouble.
- I made the assessment
that we were in trouble.
And I've never used those
terms in any situation
prior to that in my extreme flying career.
(instruments beeping)
- Mayday, mayday, mayday,
Qantas 72, Qantas 72,
flight control computer malfunctions
and we have significant injuries onboard.
- [Reporter] Kevin Sullivan
is in the fight of his life.
The Qantas captain has
twice managed to stop
his out of control plane from plunging
into the Indian Ocean.
- Tracking direct to Learmonth.
- [Reporter] He needs to get
his 315 passengers and crew
down onto the ground fast
before it happens again.
He heads for the nearest airport,
the RAAF base at Learmonth
on Western Australia's northwest coast.
- I couldn't risk exposing
myself and the passengers
to an out of control aeroplane
any longer than I had to.
And Learmonth was just off our left wing,
and that's where we decided to go.
- [Reporter] In the cabin behind him,
more than 100 passengers are injured.
- [Woman] What's happening?
- [Reporter] Many have
been knocked unconscious.
Others have broken bones
and bleeding wounds.
- Ladies and gentlemen,
this is the flight deck.
All passengers to fasten
seat belts immediately.
- [Reporter] Caroline
Southcott is in absolute agony.
Her back is broken, and
a single piece of skin
is keeping her foot attached to her leg.
But she no choice, she
has to sit in her seat.
- I was really worried my bones
were going to go through my spinal cord,
so I had to hold myself up on the armrest
for it must have been 45, 50 minutes.
- It wouldn't have been
easy 'cause she said
she could physically
feel and hear her spine
just grating like that against each other.
- Yeah, it was a very funny noise.
Prior to that I've never
had pain, bad pain.
So it was a matter of life and death.
It was a matter of suck it up, princess,
you've got to do something here.
(both laughing)
- [Reporter] Caroline now notices
that her nearly severed left
foot is facing backwards.
- During all this pain she looked down
at her ankle and said, "That's not right.
"I'm not happy with that."
She pulled the ankle forward, rotated it,
and clicked it back into place.
- Yeah, reset it.
I think there was no choice.
It was fight or die.
- [Reporter] In the rear galley
Peter and Diana are all badly injured.
Fuzzy is desperate to get to
the two unaccompanied children
he is looking after,
but his legs won't work.
- I couldn't even move.
I wanted to, I tried so much to reach out.
And I knew I could not move.
- [Reporter] Peter is bleeding
profusely from a head wound.
Diana has suffered a badly
injured back and shoulder.
But somehow, she finds the strength
to help the people around her.
(slow music)
- I tell you what, Diana,
man, she was incredible.
She's like, she reminded me of The Hulk.
You know, adrenaline came out of her
and she could lift anything.
And she made it happen.
And I can hear Diana saying,
"Okay, Fuzzy, you're next."
- Come on, nearly there.
- [Fuzzy] Man.
- [Diana] There we go, just
going to put your belt on.
- She was incredible.
I'm telling you right now, man,
that lady deserves
recognition for what she did.
- [Reporter] Pretty amazing
wife you have there.
- Mm, very proud of her.
Very proud.
- Diana Casey is one of the
true heroes of this story,
but you won't hear her speak.
It's an slap in the face to
Diana's extraordinary courage,
but Qantas has refused to let Diana
or any of its current staff be
interviewed for this programme.
As a former employee, Fuzzy Maiava
isn't bound by such
small-minded constraints.
- How on Earth did she
manage to get Fuzzy,
if you'll allow me, a reasonably big unit,
up off the ground into the seat?
- Oh man, she just sort of
like just grabbed my hands,
and just grabbed me.
And I felt like I was being
pulled by a 6'8" (laughs)
athlete, you know.
And then she just looked at me
and she just shook me and says,
"We're going to be okay,"
and she gave me a kiss
on the forehead and said,
"You're going to be fine."
- In circumstances like that
the pilot in the cockpit gives an order
for people to sit down immediately.
Well, that's what they got to do.
But in this circumstance there were people
that were unsecured, and
she took it upon herself
to break the protocol because a need to,
and I totally completely agree with her,
there was a need to, to care for people
that needed to be secured.
(dramatic music)
- Final check.
- [Reporter] With dozens of his passengers
requiring urgent medical attention,
Kevin Sullivan now has to
land his crippled Airbus A330
on that remote airfield at Learmonth.
- Okay, we're on visual approach.
Manual thrust.
Manual pitch trim.
- [Reporter] He's now flying
his aircraft entirely by hand.
But Kevin knows that at any moment,
the plane's computer might
try to wrest back control.
- Gear down.
(instruments beeping)
- [Kevin] 1,000 feet, but now we know
that at this point if something happens
we don't have the altitude to recover.
- Don't you do it.
(tyres squealing)
(people applauding)
- I remember when we
landed, everyone clapped.
- Kevin's job was outstanding under what
I would believe to be immense pressure.
- [Reporter] Did you allow
yourself just the briefest moment
to look down at your arms and legs
and think, my goodness, I'm alive?
- No, I made another quip.
I did my Arnie impersonation
from True Lies.
I said, "Ya, a little bit of excitement,
"otherwise dull day,"
as we're rolling down--
- You're not even joking, are you?
- I'm serious, yeah, of course,
because yeah, okay, so that's my release.
- [Reporter] Only now is Kevin
Sullivan able to walk back
through his aircraft
to inspect the damage.
(dramatic music)
(child crying)
- I call it the walk that changed my life.
It's quite confronting.
The interior of the cabin
was almost destroyed.
There are holes above the
seats where passenger's heads
have punctured the plastic,
and there's lots of 'em.
Of course, there were children,
children had huge contusions
on their heads where some were bleeding,
and the parents are
holding their children,
trying to console them.
As I walked past, the look of,
look what you did to my
kid, will never leave.
- There was almost a moment for you
as you made that walk where you felt it
that your heart was breaking.
Is that true?
- Yes.
Time out. (laughs)
So this is a critical part.
That's a valid question.
- I imagine that's one of the most
significant moments of your life.
I'm the head honcho.
I'm the one that has to show
leadership and strength.
But it's pretty hard when emotional chunks
are being ripped off you as
you move through the aeroplane.
(dramatic music)
- [Reporter] Qantas Flight 72 has landed
at the remote Learmonth air strip
on the northwest coast
of Western Australia.
Captain Kevin Sullivan has
brought his plane down safely.
But with so many lives in the balance,
the emergency is far from over.
(sirens wailing)
Local rescue crews
swarm through the plane.
- The emergency services
crew came onboard,
and it was just like, it was chaos.
The pain was unbearable.
I think I nearly passed out.
And the next minute I got a morphine stick
stuck in my mouth.
Yeah, "Suck on that, big fella."
- I imagine that was a pretty big relief.
- Yeah, he said, "Suck
on that, big fella."
I can remember that,
"Suck on that, big fella."
(muffled talking)
- The safest course of action
was for me to come into here,
not only because of
the aeroplane behaviour
but also the injuries
that we've all sustained.
- [Reporter] In the
terminal, Captain Sullivan
grabs a megaphone and
addresses the passengers
who've made it off the Airbus uninjured.
(muffled talking)
- The runway looked pretty good to me.
(people laughing)
(people applauding)
I made some comment about the runway
looked pretty damn good to me
as we rolled out for landing.
And at that point, everybody
was cheering again.
(dramatic music)
- [Reporter] Kevin is
relieved to be on the ground,
but he now knows what was
happening in the cabin
while he was wrestling
for control of the plane.
More than 100 passengers are
injured, some critically.
- There were accelerated into the ceiling
and with such a force that their heads
broke through the plastic--
- It's not soft.
- [Kevin] It's aviation grade plastic.
(dramatic music)
- [Reporter] The most seriously injured
are airlifted to Perth
by the Royal Flying Doctor Service.
Among them, Caroline Southcott.
- The pain in my back, it was pretty bad.
I can remember just
fighting to keep breathing,
because I thought if I stop
breathing I'll go unconscious
and then no one's going to get me back.
- You're initially thinking about,
well, what's post-injury going to be like?
How is she going to walk, and
will she walk, and all that.
And then they take it to the next level
and say to ya, "Well no,
what we're saying here
"is that her survival is in doubt."
And that's when I went, "Oh."
That's when you do freak.
- [Reporter] She's rushed
into emergency surgery
with a broken back.
Her life is slipping away.
- You died six or seven
times on the operating table.
- I'm lucky I can walk and I'm
lucky to be here alive, yeah.
- How would you describe the surgery
that Caroline went through?
- In her graphic terms?
- [Reporter] Yeah.
- "They cut me down here and
then they put me gizzards
"on the table so they could get to it."
Like your spine's on your
back, as everyone knows.
But the injury had to be addressed
from the front of the spine.
So they had to do all that.
And then put everything back
in place and stitch her up.
- They put it on the
table and did their work
and then they put it back in again.
- Threw it back in.
- [Reporter] But there's pain
behind Caroline's laughter.
Her body is now a miracle
of surgical architecture.
- They were able to replace
my vertebrae with a cage,
and biological cement and bone from my hip
that I can even move.
It's not 100%, but it's
better than it was.
Here they come.
- Geesey, geesies.
- Come on goosey, goosey, goose.
- [Bruce] Food.
- [Reporter] Then there's
the mental anguish.
Nowadays, Bruce and Caroline
live as near recluses
on their property in Queensland.
It's one of the few places they feel safe.
(slow music)
Becky refuses to fly and lives
with the trauma every day.
- [Reporter] I can see how painful it is,
these memories that
you're still living with.
It's still very real.
- Very.
Very.
- How has this changed you?
- I'm quite an emotional
ball now. (laughs)
I saw psychologists.
They diagnosed me with PTSD.
It's not a fun thing
to have when you're 17.
I was medicated until I was
pregnant with my first child,
and that's when I had to come off them.
Yeah, it's not a nice thing
when you're a teenager.
- [Reporter] Flight attendant Fuzzy Maiava
can't work anymore
because of his injuries.
- I had to replace both knees.
I have now got two titanium knees.
And I ruptured a spleen and my spine.
I have seven damaged discs.
That's a pain I get every day,
and they trigger on the
nightmares and the flashbacks.
(dramatic music)
It's really severe, it's really bad.
I can't even sleep properly at night.
I toss and turn, and that's
when the flashbacks come.
So in order for me to get around that,
I keep hitting the wall
just to ground myself.
- Gee, Fuzzy, that is an enormous thing
for one person to have to deal with.
Even now you're still having flashbacks,
still hitting the wall.
- Mate, it got to a point,
the seriousness of it,
it got to the point where I
tried to take my own life.
I ended up in ICU for a coma for a week
because I couldn't take it any longer.
The pain was unbearable.
I had been medically retired as well,
and I thought to myself, what's happening?
It was like I'd been just discarded.
- Some of the victims of QF72
received six-figure
payouts, but not Fuzzy.
As an employee, Qantas
offered him just $33,000,
a settlement he rejected on legal advice.
In the end, this proud
man was left with nothing.
Fuzzy, do you feel as though
you were properly supported?
- Like I said, I have the
greatest respect for Qantas.
- [Reporter] It's a
tough question, I know.
- Yes.
- I can see that even now you're reluctant
to criticise the airline that you loved.
But the reality is that
for you some support,
any support would have made
the world of difference.
- It would have helped me and my family
a great deal, to be honest.
- [Reporter] Kevin Sullivan didn't suffer
any physical injuries, but the events
of that day continue to haunt him.
Three years ago, he made
the difficult decision to stop flying.
- You hold onto those images,
those memories as if they were yesterday.
And that's just what your brain does
when you're in this sort of
near-death traumatic experience.
Your brain records in high definition,
and it stays in there.
It doesn't go away.
(dramatic music)
- [Reporter] Qantas Flight 72
was cruising at 37,000 feet
when the onboard computer
suddenly went haywire.
(alarm ringing)
- [Man] Stall, stall.
- [Reporter] Sending the
plane hurtling downwards.
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau
blamed incorrect data for the emergency,
but it hasn't been able to
explain how or why that happened.
It all sounds eerily similar
to the recent Boeing MAX crashes.
(slow music)
In those two cases, flight
computers reacted to faulty data.
The pilots couldn't regain control
of their planes, and 346 people died.
- It's important also to remember
that while humans are often
the least predictable part
of the safety system, they are by far
the most resilient and adaptable,
the ones who can confront a challenge
they've never seen before,
and in a short period of time
figure out a way to
solve even that crisis.
(people cheering)
- [Reporter] Captain Chesley Sullenberger,
the hero of the Hudson River landing,
believes that replacing pilot skills
with increased automation
is a fatal mistake.
- What we've learned in
aviation is that automation
does not decrease errors.
But it changes the nature
of errors that are made.
As we use more and more
technology in the cockpits,
we must always make sure that the humans
are in complete control of the
aircraft and its flight path.
(mid-tempo music)
- [Reporter] As a former
elite fighter pilot,
Kevin Sullivan had the skills
to bring his plane down safely.
The passengers and crew of QF72
know they were incredibly lucky.
- This guy saved my life.
And he gave me an opportunity to be here,
and I am breathing, I'm here,
I'm here in the flesh because of that man.
- [Reporter] Fuzzy
Maiava is now campaigning
to get Captain Sullivan
and his flight crew
the recognition they deserve.
- I think they deserve the
Qantas Diamond Chairman Award,
and also the Cross of Valour.
I believe that's Australia's
highest civilian bravery award.
So if you're out there,
please sign that petition
so it'll help get Kevin and his men
acknowledged and recognised
for what they did.
- We owe our lives, period.
- Mm, yeah, everyone does.
- Do you think he should
be recognised for that?
- [Caroline] Absolutely.
- Knighted. (laughs)
- Knighted.
He definitely saved 315 people's lives.
- [Bruce] Yeah.
- [Reporter] Hero?
- Definitely.
Definitely, without a doubt.
- [Reporter] What would you say to him?
- Thank you.
And give him a big hug.
- [Reporter] Becky can't get
on a plane to deliver that hug.
(slow music)
But Fuzzy Maiava has bravely
cast aside his fear of flying
and flown from New Zealand
to thank his hero in person.
- And I know you still
think about the passengers.
They're very top of mind for you.
We actually have one of them here now
to say a bit of a hello.
- Is that right?
- He's just over there,
over your left shoulder.
You might remember this young man.
- Kevin, hey, come on.
Oh, mate. (laughs)
Good to see you, my brother.
- Fuzzy.
- Good to see you. (laughs)
- [Kevin] Yeah.
- Oh, mate, you look--
- Welcome.
- Thank you.
Oh, my brother.
Oh, mate.
Mate.
- [Reporter] He has been
dying to see you, Kev.
- I have been, yeah.
- Fuzzy, is this the
first time you've flown?
- Yes, this is the first.
Mate, I've been dying to meet up with you.
You're the reason I'm here.
If it wasn't for you,
Kevin, we would not be here.
- Well--
- And I'm serious.
- Thank you, Fuzzy.
- A lot of people may
have said it's their job,
they get paid for it.
No, this is very unique.
And that's why I was so passionate
in trying to get this in the public realm
to get the Qantas Group and
the Australian government
to acknowledge and recognise you
because this is something
unique and it's unheard of.
And that's why I'm so passionate
and I'll never give up.
I will never give up for you, brother.
I will never give up.
(men laughing)
- [Reporter] And those calls
for recognition are taking off.
What Kevin Sullivan achieved that day
has come to represent a line in the sand
for pilots who refuse to
relinquish any more control
of their planes to computers.
- Captain Sullivan, from
one Sully to another,
I congratulate you on having
built and led your team well
in facing such an extreme crisis on QF72,
keeping your passengers and crew safe.
And since you're a former
US Navy naval aviator
and fighter pilot, bravo
zulu, I salute you.